<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-us" xml:lang="en-us">
<head>
<title>Acknowledgments</title>
<link href="../styles/9781501164873.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/SS_global.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:21d7bd89-41e5-48ab-bd9f-cfb984c8e375" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section aria-labelledby="ack_hd" role="doc-acknowledgments">
<h1 class="h1bm" id="ack_hd"><span aria-label="page 253" id="page_253" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Acknowledgments</h1>
<p class="noindent">This book wouldn’t exist without the extreme patience, generosity of spirit, and openness of the many remarkable investors who shared their insights and experiences with me. In some cases, we spent several days together. Others spoke with me countless times over many years. To my delight, they welcomed me into their homes and offices, allowed me to travel with them, spoke candidly about their setbacks and challenges, and (in one unforgettable case) even hypnotized me in an attempt to reprogram my subconscious mind. I’m deeply grateful to all of these investors for sharing the most valuable lessons they’ve learned about how to invest intelligently, think rationally, overcome adversity, and stack the odds of building a happy and fulfilling life.</p>
<p class="indent">There’s a long list of extraordinarily insightful investors whose thinking has greatly enriched this book. In particular, I’d like to thank Charlie Munger, Ed Thorp, Howard Marks, Joel Greenblatt, Bill Miller, Mohnish Pabrai, Tom Gayner, Guy Spier, Fred Martin, Ken Shubin Stein, Matthew McLennan, Jeffrey Gundlach, Francis Chou, Thyra Zerhusen, Thomas Russo, Chuck Akre, Li Lu, Peter Lynch, Pat Dorsey, Michael Price, Mason Hawkins, Bill Ackman, Jeff Vinik, Mario Gabelli, Laura Geritz, Brian McMahon, Henry Ellenbogen, Donald Yacktman, Bill Nygren, Paul Lountzis, Jason Karp, Will Danoff, François Rochon, John Spears, Joel Tillinghast, Qais Zakaria, Nick Sleep, Paul Isaac, Mike Zapata, Paul Yablon, Whitney Tilson, François-Marie Wojcik, Sarah Ketterer, Christopher Davis, Raamdeo Agrawal, Arnold Van Den Berg, Mariko Gordon, and Jean-Marie Eveillard. Thanks also to five giants who are no longer with us: Sir John Templeton, Irving Kahn, Bill Ruane, Marty Whitman, and Jack Bogle.</p>
<p class="indent">I feel enormous gratitude to my literary agent, Jim Levine, who’s provided a priceless combination of wise advice, boundless enthusiasm, and kindness. I couldn’t have asked for a better partner. I’m also <span aria-label="page 254" id="page_254" role="doc-pagebreak"/>profoundly grateful to Rick Horgan, Scribner’s executive editor, for his fierce intelligence, thoughtful editing, and perfectionism. It’s revealing that the book Rick loves most of all is <i>Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance</i>, which explores the notion of quality as a guiding principle. Many thanks also to Scribner’s Nan Graham, Roz Lippel, and Colin Harrison for embracing my book. Thanks also to the rest of the superb team at Scribner that worked on this book: Steve Boldt, Dan Cuddy, Beckett Rueda, and Jaya Miceli. It’s an amazing privilege to be published by Scribner, the hallowed home to many of my favorite authors.</p>
<p class="indent">I’ve been helped, guided, and propped up by so many friends and allies that it’s impossible to do them justice. But let me start by giving special thanks to Guy Spier, who’s been an incredible friend and champion for many years. Guy takes delight in helping others and compounding goodwill, and I’ve benefited in countless ways—not least, from his introductions to Mohnish Pabrai, Ken Shubin Stein, and Nick Sleep. Special thanks also to Jon Gertner, an exceptional writer who not only gave me moral support but shared with me his brilliant proposal for <i>The Ice at the End of the World</i>, which helped me to craft my own book proposal.</p>
<p class="indent">For their many acts of kindness, care, support, and friendship, I’d also like to thank Michael Berg, Marcus Weston, Eitan Yardeni, Avi Nahmias, Jason Zweig, Aravind Adiga, Tony Robbins, Michael O’Brien, Cecelia Wong, DJ Stout, Gillian Zoe Segal, Nina Munk, Peter Soriano, Fleming Meeks, Richard Bradley, Laurie Harting, Amey Stone, Lory Spier, Saurabh Madaan, Nikhil Hutheesing, Chris Stone, Ramin Bahrani, Marlies Talay, Beverly Goodman, Wade Savitt, Nancy Danino, Piper Tyrsdotter, Matthew Winch, Jamie True, Craig Kravetz, Howard Donnelly, Christian Moerk, Gautam Baid, Shai Dardashti, Samuel Freedman, Denis Thomopoulos, Richard Wertheimer, David Worth, Malia Boyd, Tom Easton, Charles Cartledge, Eben Harrell, Aran Dharmeratnam, Sharon Callahan, Helen and Jim Neuberger, Kathleen Hinge, Ancela Nastasi, Joan Caplin, Josh Tarasoff, Elliot Trexler, Ralph Townsend, Stig Brodersen, Preston Pysh, Kenneth Folk, Hedda Nadler, Daniel Roth, Mark Chapman, Orly Hindi, Kabir Sehgal, Shalom Sharabi, Jelisa Castrodale, Randy Stanbury, John Mihaljevic, <span aria-label="page 255" id="page_255" role="doc-pagebreak"/>William Samedy, Michael Scherb, David Mechner, Katherine Bruce, Scott Wilson, Lucy Wilson Cummings, Debbie Meiliken, Jacob Taylor, Richard Krupp, Ambi Kavanaugh, Karen Berg, and Rav Berg.</p>
<p class="indent">Many thanks also to my friends at the Aligned Center, which has given me so much more than a beautiful and peaceful place to write. Its founder, Matt Ludmer, is a role model in so many ways, and I’ve turned to him for insight on everything from investing to meditation. It’s been a delight to spend time with everyone in the orbit of the Aligned Center, including Leticia Reyes-James, Caroline Hotaling, Faryn Sand, Jacopo Surricchio, David Janes, Alison Gilbert, Andy Landorf, Kristin Kaye, Gwen Merkin, Daniel Goleman, DeLauné Michel, and Dan Fried.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the great gifts of my life is to have landed in a family full of extraordinary people. Thanks especially to my big brother, Andrew Green, and his lovely wife, Jennifer Hirschl; and to my wonderful in-laws, Marvin Cooper, Johanna Cooper, Nancy Cooper, and Bruce Meltzer.</p>
<p class="indent">Finally, I’d like to dedicate this book to five family members who have made everything possible. My mother, Marilyn Green, has been an indomitable source of strength and support from day one, and it’s fitting that she was invariably the first person to read every chapter that I wrote. My late father, Barry Green, sparked my love of language and my passion for investing. My son, Henry Green, has been an indispensable and gifted literary partner from start to finish: he helped immeasurably by feeding me background research, transcribing my interviews, checking facts, and pointing out when my prose needed additional polish. My daughter, Madeleine Green, displayed heroic patience in discussing the characters and ideas in this book. She also held me together emotionally, cheering me up and encouraging me whenever my spirits flagged. At times, I was pretty certain that she was parenting <i>me</i>. And then there’s my wife, Lauren Cooper, the kindest and most caring of people. I met Lauren when I was only twenty-two years old, and everything that’s best in my life stems from that one miraculous stroke of good fortune. Thank you all from the depths of my heart.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>