<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-us" xml:lang="en-us">
<head>
<title>Notes on Sources and Additional Resources</title>
<link href="../styles/9781501164873.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/SS_global.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:21d7bd89-41e5-48ab-bd9f-cfb984c8e375" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<section aria-labelledby="bm01_hd">
<h1 class="h1bm" id="bm01_hd"><span aria-label="page 256" id="page_256" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span aria-label="page 257" id="page_257" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Notes on Sources and Additional Resources</h1>
<p class="noindent"><i>Richer, Wiser, Happier</i> is based on my interviews with many of the world’s most successful investors. I interviewed more than forty of them for this book, typically speaking with them at length on multiple occasions. For example, I traveled with Mohnish Pabrai for five days in India, visited him in California, met with him in New York and Omaha, and spoke with him over the phone for many hours. Similarly, I spent two days with Bill Miller at his home and office in Maryland, two days with Tom Gayner in Virginia, and two days with Arnold Van Den Berg in Texas. I’ve also drawn heavily on interviews that I conducted in the distant past with investment legends such as Sir John Templeton, Bill Ruane, Michael Price, Peter Lynch, and Jack Bogle.</p>
<p class="indent">One idiosyncrasy of this book is that I’ve focused almost exclusively on investors whom I like and admire. Several times, I began to write about brilliant investors whose personalities I find unappealing, but I soon stopped. It felt almost as if the body rejected that organ. I’m fascinated by investors who have demonstrated their financial prowess over many years, but I’m particularly drawn to those with wisdom, insights, and virtues that extend beyond an exceptional talent for making money. The investors I’ve spotlighted throughout this book can undoubtedly help us to become richer. But they also shed light on how to think and live.</p>
<p class="indent">I’ve written these Notes on Sources and Additional Resources in much the same spirit. My purpose here isn’t to construct an exhaustive record of where I derived every fact and figure in the book, but to point you in the direction of a wide variety of resources that I hope you’ll find useful in your own quest to become richer, wiser, and happier. With that in mind, I asked the investors I interviewed to recommend books <span aria-label="page 258" id="page_258" role="doc-pagebreak"/>that have helped to shape their thinking. In the pages that follow, you’ll find an array of their recommendations, along with some of my own.</p>
<h2 class="h2bm">INTRODUCTION: INSIDE THE MINDS OF THE GREATEST INVESTORS</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">To learn more about Jack Bogle, who died in 2019, check out some of his timeless investment books, including the 10th Anniversary Edition of <i>Common Sense on Mutual Funds</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2009), which warns eloquently about the difficulties of beating the market, the perils of speculation, and the devastating effect of excessive fees on investors’ returns. My favorite of Bogle’s books is <i>Enough: True Measures of Money, Business, and Life</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2008), which features chapters with quirky titles such as “Too Many Twenty-First-Century Values, Not Enough Eighteenth-Century Values.”
<p class="ennoteind">When I interviewed Bogle over the phone two decades ago, he spoke emotionally about what he’d learned from his mentor, Walter Morgan, a fund pioneer who embodied the old-fashioned values that Bogle championed, such as “discipline, honor, duty, [and] integrity.” The phone went silent, and I wondered if we’d been disconnected. I eventually realized that Bogle was too choked up to speak. Finally, he said, “Excuse me. It’s putting tears in my eyes.… I guess I loved him, and he did so much for me.” Morgan left an indelible impact on Bogle because he was a “principled gentleman of very high character” who taught him that “the shareholder is king.… My God, a shareholder wrote him once that he didn’t have a very good suit and did Mr. Morgan have one for him? And Mr. Morgan sent him one.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">When I asked Bogle who else had shaped his investment philosophy, he mentioned two prominent writers. Charles Ellis wrote a “seminal” article in the 1970s titled “The Loser’s Game” and later published a classic book titled <i>Winning the Loser’s Game</i> (McGraw-Hill, 1998). Bogle also recommended Burton Malkiel’s book, <i>A Random Walk Down Wall Street</i> (W.W. Norton &amp; Company, 2020), which reinforced his unshakable belief in the logic of index funds.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">My profile of Bill Miller (“It’s Bill Miller’s Time”) ran in <i>Fortune</i>’s December 10, 2001 issue. It depicted him plunging presciently into stocks after 9/11 as the market cratered. In those days, Miller’s peers ridiculed him for investing $500 million in a profitless retailer that many expected to go bust: Amazon.com. But Miller pointed out to me that Amazon had “incredible economies of scale, which will eventually become apparent.” As I wrote back then, “If he’s wrong, it will be the most public failure of his career. But if he’s right—and Miller still believes he is—the Amazon bet will rank as one of the great investment calls of all time.” The stock has since soared from less than $10 a share to more than $3,000, and Miller has ridden it the whole way.</li>
<li class="ennote">Ed Thorp, the epitome of a rational thinker who focuses on maximizing the odds of success and minimizing the odds of disaster, initially gained fame as a gambler. He wrote a bestseller, <i>Beat the Dealer</i> (Blaisdell Publishing Company, 1962), which revealed how to win at blackjack by counting cards. More recently, he wrote an entertaining memoir, <i>A Man For All Markets</i> (Random House, <span aria-label="page 259" id="page_259" role="doc-pagebreak"/>2017), which recounts his triumphs in everything from roulette and baccarat to trading options and warrants. When I asked Miller about Thorp, he remarked, “He’s the best, I think. As great an investor as Buffett is, I think Ed Thorp is better because he figured out stuff nobody knew.… Thorp’s record is just so much better and with almost no volatility, and he figured the whole thing out himself and invented statistical arbitrage.”
<p class="ennoteind">One reason for Thorp’s success is that he applied the Kelly criterion, a betting system that he says helped him to calculate “an optimal trade-off between risk and return.… It keeps you from betting too much.” In <i>Fortune’s Formula</i> (Hill and Wang, 2005), William Poundstone writes about Thorp’s application of this betting strategy, which enabled him to compound wealth at a high rate with no risk of ruin. For a cautionary reminder of why that’s so important, it’s worth reading <i>When Genius Failed</i> (Random House, 2000), Roger Lowenstein’s riveting history of Long-Term Capital Management—a hedge fund that was so highly leveraged that its death almost triggered a financial collapse. Thorp told me that he was offered the chance to invest $10 million in the fund, but steered clear because its famously clever (and fatally arrogant) managers were “taking too much risk… So the probability of their ruin appeared substantial to me.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Thorp also recommends <i>Superforecasting</i> (Crown Publishers, 2015) by psychology professor Philip Tetlock and journalist Dan Gardner. Tetlock’s research shows how investors, economists, and other soothsayers overestimate their ability to predict the future. In reality, warns Tetlock, “the average expert was roughly as accurate as a dart-throwing chimpanzee.” One enduring lesson that all of us should learn from battle-hardened investment sages such as Bogle and Thorp is that we must always guard against our own capacity for overconfidence.</p></li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER ONE: THE MAN WHO CLONED WARREN BUFFETT</h2>
<p class="ennoteno">This chapter is based almost entirely on my interviews with Mohnish Pabrai. If you’d like to hear more from him, you can find dozens of his speeches, podcast appearances, and blogs at his website, <a href="http://chaiwithpabrai.com">chaiwithpabrai.com</a>. I’d also recommend his book, <i>The Dhandho Investor</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2007). True to form, he declares in the opening paragraph, “I have very few original ideas. Virtually everything has been lifted from somewhere.”</p>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">If you’d like to learn more about the Dakshana Foundation, visit <a href="https://dakshana.org">https://dakshana.org</a>. It’s hard to imagine a more cost-efficient way to help lift a family out of poverty than to give a gifted but underprivileged student the opportunity to win a place at the Indian Institutes of Technology or a government medical college. A donation of $99 per month for twenty-four months pays for one scholar to complete Dakshana’s two-year program.</li>
<li class="ennote">Pabrai uses the word <i>cloning</i> to describe his habit of shamelessly borrowing (and often improving upon) other people’s best ideas and practices. Where can you learn more about this winning strategy for investing, business, and life? There are surprisingly few resources to recommend. But I regard Tim Ferriss as another grand master of cloning, though it’s not a term I’ve heard him use. Ferriss’s hefty book, <i>Tools of Titans</i> (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017), is stuffed <span aria-label="page 260" id="page_260" role="doc-pagebreak"/>with practical advice that he’s elicited from many world-class performers on subjects as diverse as morning routines, exercise, diet, productivity, and wealth creation.
<p class="ennoteind">His podcast, <i>The Tim Ferriss Show</i>, is an even richer resource. My favorite episodes are Ferriss’s interviews with his friend Josh Waitzkin, a former national chess champion and world champion in Tai Chi Chuan Push Hands, who is also the author of <i>The Art of Learning</i> (Free Press, 2007). Waitzkin, who is now mastering the art of paddle surfing, also trains hedge fund managers and elite athletes to perform at their peak by cultivating “deep presence” and “unobstructed self-expression,” which are critically important at the highest levels of mental games such as investing and writing. Pabrai, Ferriss, and Waitzkin share the ability to deconstruct what works and apply that knowledge with meticulous attention to detail.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Once you start to search for other examples of cloning, you soon realize how many towering figures throughout history consciously sought to emulate their role models and replicate their behavior. Leo Tolstoy wrote in his diary in 1884, “I have to create a circle of reading for myself: Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, Buddha, Pascal, the New Testament. This is also necessary for all people.” Marcus Aurelius begins his immortal book, <i>Meditations</i>, with a detailed list of desirable qualities that he’s observed in sixteen people, including his adopted father, the Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius: “a man tested by life, accomplished, unswayed by flattery,” compassionate, altruistic, diligent, never rude, “never content with first impressions,” indifferent to “superficial honors,” “always sober, always steady, and never vulgar, or a prey to fads.” Similarly, the philosopher Seneca recommended imagining that we’re being watched at all times by someone we revere and attempting to hold ourselves to that person’s exemplary standards.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Pabrai’s success is built to an astonishing degree on principles and practices that he cloned from Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger. Many years ago, Pabrai gave me a copy of <i>Poor Charlie’s Almanack</i> (Donning, 2005), an indispensable collection of Munger’s speeches and writings. Pabrai inscribed it “I hope you enjoy this as much as I did. Best book I ever read.” If you want to learn deeply from Munger, not only about how to invest but about how to think more rationally, this is your bible. It repays countless readings.
    <p class="ennoteind">For disciples of Buffett, the first challenge is to choose from a vast range of useful resources, including <i>Tap Dancing to Work</i> (Portfolio/Penguin, 2012) by his friend Carol Loomis and <i>The Warren Buffett Way</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 1994) by Robert Hagstrom. Personally, I return again and again to the Chairman’s Letters that Buffett writes in his annual reports, which are available for free (going back to 1995) at <a href="https://www.berkshirehathaway.com/">www.berkshirehathaway.com</a>. Hardcore students who wish to go back further can delve into collections such as <i>Berkshire Hathaway Letters to Shareholders 1965-2019</i> (Explorist Productions, 2020), which is regularly updated by its editor, Max Olson. If you truly immerse yourself in Buffett’s writings on business and investing, I’m not sure you’d need to read anything else on these subjects for the rest of your life. It’s all there. Everything you need to know. Sitting in plain view. And a whole lot cheaper than an MBA.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Pabrai’s belief in the benefits of unwavering truthfulness stems from <i>Power vs. Force</i> (Hay House, 2002), a book by the late David Hawkins, whose writ<span aria-label="page 261" id="page_261" role="doc-pagebreak"/>ings have also had a profound effect on Guy Spier and Arnold Van Den Berg. Hawkins, who was a psychiatrist and physician before he became a spiritual teacher, writes with illuminating clarity about the positive and negative effects of different types of behavior—and how to elevate our level of consciousness. For example, he observes that “Simple kindness to one’s self and all that lives is the most powerful transformational force of all. It produces no backlash, has no downside, and never leads to loss or despair. It increases one’s own true power without exacting any toll. But to reach maximum power, such kindness can permit no exceptions, nor can it be practiced with the expectation of some selfish gain or reward. And its effect is as far-reaching as it is subtle.”
    <p class="ennoteind">Hawkins, who taught his followers to pursue a path that he described as “devotional nonduality,” also wrote books such as <i>The Eye of the I</i> (Hay House, 2001), <i>I: Reality and Subjectivity</i> (Hay House, 2003), and <i>Truth vs Falsehood</i> (Hay House, 2005). He intended them as guides for “the seriously committed spiritual student” who is seeking enlightenment. They’re not as accessible as <i>Power vs. Force</i>, but they’re extraordinary and may resonate with you on an even deeper level. Lately, I’ve been reading another of his books, <i>Letting Go</i> (Hay House, 2013), which offers a practical technique for surrendering negative emotions.</p></li>
</ol>
    <h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER TWO: THE WILLINGNESS TO BE LONELY</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">My conversations with Sir John Templeton took place in November 1998 at his office and his home in the Bahamas, and I later spoke with him again over the phone. My article, “The Secrets of Sir John Templeton,” appeared in the January 1999 edition of <i>Money</i> magazine.</li>
<li class="ennote">John Rothchild wrote a fine book, <i>The Davis Dynasty</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2001), that recounts how Shelby Cullom Davis, his son Shelby M. C. Davis, and <i>his</i> son Christopher Davis built an investment business that has prospered over three generations. The family’s wealth was built not only through shrewd stock picking, but extreme frugality. When I interviewed Christopher Davis, he told me that his grandfather, Shelby Cullom Davis, “viewed spending as immoral.” Once, when Christopher was about thirteen, he was walking around Wall Street with his grandfather and had the temerity to ask for $1 to buy a hot dog. His grandfather refused, explaining how “that dollar would turn into $1,000 if I invested it like him and lived as long!” Christopher’s father, Shelby M. C. Davis, inherited this disdain for such shocking displays of extravagance: “If I was dating someone my dad didn’t like, he’d say, ‘She’s a spender.’ ”</li>
<li class="ennote">Among his many free-thinking philanthropic ventures, Templeton funded scientific research that explored the intersection between health and prayer. For example, see “Study of the Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer in Cardiac Bypass Patients: A Multicenter Randomized Trial of Uncertainty and Certainty of Receiving Intercessory Prayer,” published in the <i>American Heart Journal</i> in 2006. The Templeton Foundation continues to pursue his vision of “relentless curiosity in pursuit of infinite discovery.” Its website, templeton.org, describes its funding for a multitude of intriguing projects, ranging from cutting-edge genetics research to a “Cultivating Genius Initiative” that seeks to nurture “one-<span aria-label="page 262" id="page_262" role="doc-pagebreak"/>in-a-million mathematical minds” to a film titled <i>Act Like a Holy Man</i> about Archbishop Desmond Tutu and the Dalai Lama. By the end of 2018, the foundation had given away $1.5 billion and still had an endowment worth almost $3 billion.</li>
<li class="ennote">My description of Templeton’s unconventional upbringing is based primarily on my interviews with him. But I’ve also drawn on the biographical accounts in two of the best books written about him: <i>Investing the Templeton Way</i> (McGraw-Hill, 2008) by Lauren Templeton and Scott Phillips and <i>The Templeton Touch</i> (Templeton Press, 2012 edition) by William Proctor.</li>
<li class="ennote">To learn more about the wartime investment environment, see <i>Wealth, War &amp; Wisdom</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2008) by the late Barton Biggs, who was a renowned investor in his own right. Biggs writes in captivating detail of the war years, while also drawing shrewd lessons on how to preserve wealth in the most tumultuous times. For example: “Uncertainty compels diversification. Diversification is and always has been the first tenet of the Prudent Man Rule of Investing.… In sub-Saharan Africa, for centuries, people believed cattle were the safest repository of wealth. That was until the great drought came along.” Biggs also wrote a memoir, <i>Hedgehogging</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2006), which is full of his stylish, street-smart insights. For example: “The stock market is a sadistic, contrary, changeable beast and nothing is forever.”</li>
<li class="ennote">Lauren Templeton and Scott Phillips provide a detailed account of Templeton’s short-selling strategy in <i>Investing the Templeton Way</i>. They point out that he protected himself against the danger of runaway losses by establishing an ironclad rule that he’d quickly “cover” his short position if a stock rose by a certain percentage after he placed the bet. When Lauren Templeton delivered a 2017 speech as part of the Talks at Google series, she suggested that Sir John (her great-uncle) may have invested as much as $400 million shorting these stocks. She explained that his strategy was to short stocks seven days before the expiration of the lockup and to cover his short position ten days after the expiration.</li>
<li class="ennote">I find myself much more open to Templeton’s books now than when I first read them two decades ago. For example, <i>Wisdom from World Religions</i> (Templeton Foundation Press, 2002) now strikes me as a particularly valuable collection of two hundred “eternal spiritual principles” that Templeton considered “the set of rules by which we should live.” When I read the book again a couple of years ago, I felt my face flush with embarrassment and literally groaned out loud as I realized how narrow-minded I’d been and how much I’d failed to learn from him. In the margin of Templeton’s book, I wrote, “The joke is how simultaneously smart and dumb I could be—so busy analyzing Proust and thinking about Nietzsche that I missed the obvious wisdom he shared with me. I was just too obtuse and prejudiced to see what lay behind his success and joy.”</li>
<li class="ennote">Templeton’s fascination with “thought control” dated back to his childhood. Thanks to his mother, he grew up with the teachings of the New Thought movement, which emphasized the role of “mind power” in achieving happiness, health, success, and prosperity. His writings are filled with quotes from leading figures in this movement, including the Unity Church minister Imelda Shanklin, who preached, “When you rule your mind, you rule your world.” Templeton wrote the foreword to a book titled <i>New Thought, Ancient Wisdom</i> (Templeton <span aria-label="page 263" id="page_263" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Foundation, 2006) by his “friend and colleague on the quest,” Glenn Mosley. A key figure in this spiritual movement was Ernest Holmes, a New Thought writer whom Templeton called a genius. Holmes, a believer in “spiritual mind healing,” observed, “We live in an intelligent universe which responds to our mental states. To the extent that we learn to control these mental states, we shall automatically control our environment.” Holmes also predicted that “Somewhere down the path of human experience we will all awake to the realization that we ourselves are heaven or hell.”</li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER THREE: EVERYTHING CHANGES</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">The quotation that opens this chapter is from <i>Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind</i> (John Weatherhill, 1970), a collection of luminous talks with Shunryu Suzuki about Zen Buddhist meditation and practice. Shortly after this quote, Suzuki explains, “When we realize the everlasting truth of ‘everything changes’ and find our composure in it, we find ourselves in Nirvana. Without accepting the fact that everything changes, we cannot find perfect composure.”
<p class="ennoteind">I’ve written at length about the implications of impermanence for investors, but I might just as easily have focused on another critically important idea that we should also borrow from Zen: the notion of <i>shoshin</i>, or beginner’s mind. Suzuki suggests that we should always strive to retain an “empty mind” that is “open to everything.” He regards this receptive attitude as the secret of Zen practice, observing, “A mind full of preconceived ideas, subjective intentions, or habits is not open to things as they are.… You should not have your own idea when you listen to someone. Forget what you have in your mind and just listen to what he says.… Our mind should be soft and open enough to understand things as they are.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Mariko Gordon, one of the most thoughtful money managers I’ve met, says investors should also retain a beginner’s mind. “That’s really important,” she told me. “Not making assumptions and just seeing everything as if you’re seeing it for the first time [and] the ability to be not too attached to a point of view.” When she starts researching a company, “I don’t have any preconceived notions,” adds Gordon. “In talking to management, I ask a lot of open-ended questions. So I’m not going in with an agenda of ‘I’m trying to find out x, y, and z.’ I go and have a conversation, and I see where the conversation takes us. I just have genuine curiosity about their business.… I’m happy to be the village idiot. I have no shame around not knowing.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Gordon, whose open-minded curiosity has led her in many unexpected directions, recommends reading <i>Hardcore Zen</i> (Wisdom Publications, 2015) by Brad Warner, an ordained Zen teacher who was previously the bassist in a punk band. She also likes the writings of Alan Lew, a Zen rabbi who coauthored a book titled <i>One God Clapping</i> (Jewish Lights, 2001). And she recommends <i>The Art of Time</i> (Da Capo Lifelong Books, 2000) by Jean-Louis Servan-Schreiber, which she says explores “how to think about our relationship with time not in a tactical way, but a strategic way” that is “deeper” and “more meditative.”</p></li>
<li class="ennote">T. Rowe Price’s essay, “Change—the Investor’s Only Certainty,” appears in <i>Clas</i><span aria-label="page 264" id="page_264" role="doc-pagebreak"/><i>sics: An Investor’s Anthology</i> (The Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts, 1989), which was edited by Charles Ellis and James Vertin. The book features essays by a host of financial giants, including John Maynard Keynes, Benjamin Graham, Philip Fisher, and Roy Neuberger. One of the best essays comes from Ellis, who writes this about the psychological challenge of sustaining our long-term commitment to stocks: “The crucial question is whether the investor will, in fact, hold on. The problem is not in the market, but in ourselves, our perceptions, and our reactions to our perceptions. This is why it is so important for each client to develop a realistic knowledge of his own and/or his organization’s tolerance for market fluctuations…” There’s also a 1984 speech by Templeton on “Worldwide Investing,” which ends with this startling jolt to the brain: “If you do not fall down on your knees each day, with overwhelming gratitude for your blessings—your multiplying multitudes of blessings—then <i>you</i> just have not yet <i>seen</i> the big picture.”</li>
<li class="ennote">You can dip into a free archive of “Memos from Howard Marks” at <a href="http://www.oaktreecapital.com/insights/howard-marks-memos">www.oaktreecapital.com/insights/howard-marks-memos</a>, going back more than three decades. You can also subscribe to receive email notifications whenever he posts a new memo. Occasionally, even in the world of investing, there is a free and abundantly nutritious lunch.</li>
<li class="ennote">One of my favorite investing books is <i>The Most Important Thing Illuminated</i> (Columbia University Press, 2013) by Howard Marks, which includes annotations by Christopher Davis, Joel Greenblatt, Paul Johnson, and Seth Klarman. If you’re a dedicated student of markets and want to understand how to position your portfolio intelligently for “the possible outcomes that lie ahead,” you should also read his second book, <i>Mastering the Market Cycle</i> (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018), which looks in depth at subjects such as the credit cycle, the debt cycle, and the “pendulum of investor psychology.” It’s not as light a read as his previous book, but it provides a robust framework for how to think about markets. Equally important, I’d supplement everything you can learn from his two books by religiously reading his latest memos, which lay out how he’s weighing the risks and rewards in the current environment. That’s especially valuable at cyclical extremes, when he can help you to avoid the opposing perils of excessive fear or greed.</li>
<li class="ennote">I’ve quoted a couple of insights from Michel de Montaigne in this chapter, both of them drawn from Sarah Bakewell’s marvelous book <i>How to Live, or, A life of Montaigne in one question and twenty attempts at an answer</i> (Chatto &amp; Windus, 2010). Montaigne, like all of the best investors, knew the value of retreating from the world so he could think in solitude. Bakewell, who describes Montaigne’s library as “a chamber of marvels” stuffed with peculiar objects and memorabilia, quotes him saying, “Sorry the man, to my mind, who has not in his own home a place to be all by himself, to pay his court privately to himself, to hide!” One chapter in Bakewell’s book is about the importance of questioning everything; her subtitle, inspired by a line from Socrates, is “All I know is that I know nothing, and I’m not even sure about that.”</li>
<li class="ennote">The role of luck in investing and life lies at the heart of Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s fiercely original book <i>Fooled by Randomness</i> (Thomson/Texere, 2004), which Marks often cites. Taleb is a brilliant and combative skeptic whose intellect <span aria-label="page 265" id="page_265" role="doc-pagebreak"/>scares me. I have a lingering fear of being flamed by him. But nobody can match his in-your-face talent for challenging our lazy assumptions and delusions about luck, uncertainty, and risk. For example, in <i>Fooled By Randomness</i>, he declares, “we often have the mistaken impression that a strategy is an excellent strategy, or an entrepreneur a person endowed with ‘vision,’ or a trader a talented trader, only to realize that 99.9% of their past performance is attributable to chance and chance alone.”
<p class="ennoteind">None of Taleb’s books unsettled me more beneficially than <i>Antifragile</i> (Random House, 2012), which pushed me to ponder a critical question that every investor should attempt to answer: How can I make my portfolio and my life less fragile? As Taleb warns succinctly, “The fragile breaks with time.” In truth, all of Taleb’s books contain precious insights. For example, consider this from <i>The Black Swan</i> (Random House, 2007): “This idea that in order to make a decision you need to focus on the consequences (which you can know) rather than the probability (which you can’t know) is the <i>central idea of uncertainty</i>.” Or mull over this from <i>Skin in the Game</i> (Random House, 2018): “<i>In a strategy that entails ruin, benefits never offset risks of ruin</i>.” Like all of the savviest investors—from Ed Thorp to Warren Buffett to Howard Marks—Taleb’s investment philosophy is based on the essential understanding that “survival is what matters.”</p></li>
<li class="ennote">For a much more scholarly discussion of the <i>Satipatthana Sutta</i>, it’s worth reading Joseph Goldstein’s book <i>Mindfulness</i> (Sounds True, 2013), which is full of wisdom for Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike. Goldstein, whose book is billed as “a practical guide to awakening,” is one of the preeminent teachers of mindfulness meditation in the West. For another perspective on meditation and awakening, I’d recommend <i>Mastering the Core Teachings of the Buddha</i> (Aeon Books, 2018) by Daniel Ingram. Its subtitle—<i>An Unusually Hardcore Dharma Book</i>—is both a warning and an enticement. I was introduced to the book by Josh Tarasoff, a hedge fund manager whose meditation practice plays a central role in preserving his calm equilibrium as an investor.</li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER FOUR: THE RESILIENT INVESTOR</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">You can read more about Benjamin Graham’s life in <i>The Einstein of Money</i> (Prometheus Books, 2012), a solid biography by Joe Carlen. I also enjoyed <i>Benjamin Graham: The Father of Financial Analysis</i>, a paper published in 1977 by the Financial Analysts Research Foundation. Coauthored by Graham’s disciple, Irving Kahn, it’s available for free online, courtesy of the CFA Institute. It includes an affectionate sketch of Graham’s life, along with Kahn’s reflections on his mentor’s character and intellectual firepower. For example: “His speed of thought was so great that most people were puzzled at how he could resolve a complicated question directly after having heard it.… He had another extraordinary characteristic in the breadth and depth of his memory. This explains why he could read Greek, Latin, Spanish, and German. Even more remarkable, without having studied Spanish formally, he was able to translate a Spanish novel into literary English so professionally that it was accepted by an American publisher.”
<p class="ennoteind"><span aria-label="page 266" id="page_266" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Graham’s magnum opus, <i>Security Analysis</i> (The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc., 1934), which he coauthored with David Dodd, is a hefty and intimidating tome. Tom Gayner, the co-CEO of Markel, recommends the 1934 edition because “that was truly Ben Graham’s voice and his point of view,” infused with the author’s passion for Greek and Roman literature and his worldly perspective on “why people do the things they do in periods of triumph and despair.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Graham’s other great work, <i>The Intelligent Investor</i>, is more accessible. It’s available in a revised edition (Harper Collins, 2003) with new commentary by Jason Zweig. There’s also a collection of Graham’s shorter writings (plus several interviews) titled <i>Benjamin Graham: Building a Profession</i> (McGraw Hill, 2010), which was edited by Zweig and Rodney Sullivan.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Matthew McLennan’s fascination with ancient and modern history bolsters his belief that we must “accept uncertainty” and consciously limit our financial exposure to unexpected chaos. “One book of history that informed me greatly,” he says, is the <i>History of the Peloponnesian War</i> (Penguin Classics; Revised Edition, 1972) by Thucydides, which recounts how the rise of Sparta (“a very traditional, austere, military culture”) threatened the might of Athens (“a thriving, America-like society”) in ways that “produced insecurity” and led to war. McLennan sees similar destabilizing forces at play in the rise of China, which threatens the dominance of the United States, much as the rise of Germany in the early 1900s threatened Great Britain in a period when it was “peaking out.” These historical patterns are “not necessarily a template of what will happen,” but they are a reminder never to become complacent about the geopolitical and economic risks that may be building. McLennan adds, “Incidentally, Thucydides owned his own gold mine, apparently. So he was no stranger to the merits of having a potential hedge.”</li>
<li class="ennote">McLennan’s strategy of owning “persistent businesses” that are relatively resistant to disruption and destruction stems partly from his study of physics and the principle of entropy increase, which helps to explain his belief that “things tend toward disorder over time.” He has also borrowed from biology. For example, he views the economy as a Darwinian ecosystem in which all businesses are on a path to fade or die, just as most species eventually become extinct.
<p class="ennoteind">To explore this idea further, see Robert Hagstrom’s book, <i>Investing: The Last Liberal Art</i> (Texere, 2000), which draws lessons from fields as diverse as physics, psychology, and philosophy. In a chapter titled “Biology: The Origin of a New Species,” Hagstrom applies an evolutionary framework to investing. This leads him to observe how difficult it is to find a strategy that will continue to work, given that financial markets constantly change and adapt. “As more agents begin using the same strategy, its profitability drops,” he writes. “The inefficiency becomes apparent, and the original strategy is washed out. But then new agents enter the picture with new ideas.… Capital shifts and the new strategy explodes, which starts the evolutionary process again.” As Paul Lountzis points out in chapter seven, part of Buffett’s genius is that he keeps evolving, instead of sticking with the same strategy as the economic environment changes.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">McLennan was also influenced by Stephen Wolfram’s 1197-page monster of a book, <i>A New Kind of Science</i> (Wolfram Media, 2002). Wolfram, whom he describes as “a pioneering thinker in the field of complexity,” performed millions <span aria-label="page 267" id="page_267" role="doc-pagebreak"/>of computer experiments involving cellular automata, which consist of lines of cells, each colored black or white. Wolfram applied some simple rules that, over time, produced patterns of immense complexity. His book, which is filled with pictures of these unpredictably complex (and often seemingly random) patterns, gave “intellectual backbone” to McLennan’s belief that we should expect and “respect uncertainty.”</p></li>
<li class="ennote">When I asked McLennan how he handles uncertainty in his own life, he replied that he finds it “very valuable” to study Stoic philosophers such as Seneca and Marcus Aurelius, who cause “you to reflect on what’s disrupting your equilibrium.” McLennan added, “Heraclitus had this expression, ‘panta rhei,’ and I think it was referring to this notion of everything being in flux. And I’ve often thought about it. What I observe in the world is that, if you can accept that stuff exogenous to you is in a state of flux, you can focus on your own endogenous equanimity. And what I see out there is most people doing the opposite. They’re trying to control that exogenous flux. They’re trying to predict. They’re trying to be positioned for it. And that causes a state of inner turmoil. So I think part of it is almost a very simple behavioral switch. It’s saying, am I philosophically willing to accept flux, complexity, and uncertainty, or not? And if you say, yes, I am, then I think it’s extremely freeing in terms of your ability to focus on your own equanimity.”
<p class="ennoteind">In practical terms, what might that entail? As someone who has focused a lot of attention on trying to build my own equanimity, I’d like to venture a few rudimentary suggestions. Like McLennan, I’ve also found solace and perspective in Stoic philosophy, particularly the writings of Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius, which we’ll return to shortly.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">I’ve also found mindfulness meditation immensely helpful. One approach that resonates for me is taught by George Mumford, a former heroin addict who later became a meditation teacher to Michael Jordan and Kobe Bryant. Mumford has a terrific course on the consistently excellent Ten Percent Happier app, which also features meditation courses with teachers such as Joseph Goldstein and Sharon Salzberg. I also like Mumford’s book, <i>The Mindful Athlete</i> (Parallax Press, 2015), which shares various techniques that can help you to connect to “that centered place in yourself in which you’re able to find space between stimulus and response, the calm eye in the center of the hurricane.” The ability to remain calm and centered amid the maelstrom of life seems to me as essential for top-notch investors as for professional athletes.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">The type of “loving-kindness” meditation that Salzberg and many others teach can also have hugely positive effects on its practitioners’ emotions and even the wiring of their brains. If you don’t believe me, read <i>Happiness</i> (Little, Brown and Company, 2003) by Matthieu Ricard, who abandoned his career in cellular genetics to become a Buddhist monk. “As influential as external conditions may be, suffering, like well-being, is essentially an inner state,” writes Ricard. “Understanding that is the key prerequisite to a life worth living.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Books such as <i>Altered Traits</i> (Avery, 2017) by Daniel Goleman and Richard Davidson explore the science of mindfulness, showing the far-reaching effects of these ancient practices on the mind, brain, and body. Similarly, Kristin Neff, an associate professor at the University of Texas at Austin, studies the psychological <span aria-label="page 268" id="page_268" role="doc-pagebreak"/>benefits of self-compassion, a concept that she borrowed from Buddhism. She and Christopher Germer wrote <i>The Mindful Self-Compassion Workbook</i> (The Guildford Press, 2018), which draws on this scientific research to explain how self-compassion can be harnessed to build inner strength, resilience, and emotional well-being.</p></li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER FIVE: SIMPLICITY IS THE ULTIMATE SOPHISTICATION</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">Joel Greenblatt has written three books about investing. I’d start by reading <i>The Little Book That Beats the Market</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2005), which distills a lifetime of rational thinking about the art of stock picking into its essence. The book is a model of simplicity.
<p class="ennoteind">Greenblatt’s next book, <i>The Big Secret for the Small Investor</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2011) wasn’t as successful, but it shares some uncomfortable truths that anyone who hopes to beat the market would do well to ponder. “For most investors, figuring out the value of a business is simply out of the question—to do a good job is just much too tough,” he writes. “What about getting an expert to do it for us? Sorry.… Due to fees and the way the investment business works, most active mutual fund managers underperform the market.” Greenblatt’s solution for most investors is to index, but he cautions that the garden variety of market-cap-weighted index funds own too many overpriced stocks and too few bargains.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Earlier in his career, Greenblatt also wrote <i>You Can Be a Stock Market Genius</i> (Fireside, 1999), a sophisticated but entertaining guide to investing in specialized niches such as spin-offs, mergers, and bankruptcies. For investors with the analytical skills to navigate these deep waters, it’s an invaluable book. A friend of mine who studied at Harvard Business School and has run a successful investment firm told me, “I personally made $10 million because of that book.” When my wife heard this, she pointed out that I’d failed to derive the same benefit from reading it.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Greenblatt’s interest in giving back to society has mostly involved education reform. He helped to start Success Academy, a large (and politically controversial) network of not-for-profit charter schools, which you can read more about at <a href="http://www.successacademies.org">www.successacademies.org</a>. He sits on its board of trustees, alongside other prominent money managers such as Daniel Loeb, John Petry, and Yen Liow. In his latest book, <i>Common Sense: The Investor’s Guide to Equality, Opportunity and Growth</i> (Columbia Business School Publishing, 2020), Greenblatt writes that the premise behind these charter schools was to provide a model of high-performing schools that could be replicated in many other low-income areas: “it would help show that—with the right supports—poor, low-income and minority students could achieve at the highest levels.”
<p class="ennoteind">How has it worked out? In 2019, writes Greenblatt, students from the Success Network’s forty-five schools performed so well in state math and English exams that their “results made Success # 1 for student achievement in all of New York, outperforming every wealthy suburban school district in the state.” That’s all the more impressive when you consider that the Success Academy schools are <span aria-label="page 269" id="page_269" role="doc-pagebreak"/>mostly located in the poorest areas of New York City and that 75 percent of the students come from economically disadvantaged backgrounds.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">For the definitive account of the 1980s junk-bond scandal that led to Michael Milken’s imprisonment, read James Stewart’s <i>Den of Thieves</i> (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1992) and then decide whether Milken deserved the presidential pardon that years of lobbying finally won him in 2020.</li>
<li class="ennote">For a more technical discussion of how to invest rationally in high-quality businesses such as Coca-Cola, see <i>Value Investing From Graham to Buffett and Beyond</i> (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2001) by Bruce Greenwald, Judd Kahn, Paul Sonkin, and Michael van Biema. More specifically, Roger Lowenstein’s first-rate biography, <i>Buffett</i> (Random House, 1995), includes a detailed explanation of why Buffett “staked a fourth or so of Berkshire’s market value” on Coca-Cola, investing more in it “than in any previous stock.” Lowenstein observes that it was a simple business with pricing power, a protective moat, and unique name recognition. And even though the stock <i>seemed</i> expensive, the company’s earning power was so strong that “Buffett thought he was getting a Mercedes for the price of a Chevrolet.” As Greenblatt points out, the fundamental secret of intelligent investing is simple: “Figure out what something is worth and pay a lot less.”</li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER SIX: NICK &amp; ZAK’S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">As Nick Sleep and Qais Zakaria discovered, Robert Pirsig’s <i>Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance</i> (William Morrow and Company, 1974) is surprisingly relevant to the patient investor—and to anyone who is trying to create something of enduring value, whether it’s a fund, a business, a work of art, or a philanthropic venture. Early in his book, Pirsig explains how he plans to explore his subject: “I don’t want to hurry it. That itself is a poisonous twentieth-century attitude. When you want to hurry something, that means you no longer care about it and want to get on to other things. I just want to get at it slowly, but carefully and thoroughly…”
<p class="ennoteind">Sleep recalls, “That book woke me up to the whole subject of thinking about how to think, and it just changed everything.” For example, it led him to ask questions such as, “How can I make myself a better investor by thinking properly? Thinking about how to think: <i>that’s</i> the job.” As Sleep puts it, Pirsig is dedicated to the pursuit of what is “true,” “important,” and “intellectually honest,” and he sheds light on what it means to behave in a “high-quality” way.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Another unexpected book that has inspired Sleep’s approach to investing and life is Michael Pollan’s <i>A Place of My Own</i> (Penguin Books, 2008). It tells the story of Pollan’s quest to design and construct (“with my own two unhandy hands”) an enchanting building in the woods behind his house “as a place to read and write and daydream.” Sleep remarks, “What I love about that is the gentle, quiet contemplation of building something really properly, doing it quietly on his own, and he’s reading about it and enjoying the process. But it gets expressed in this beautiful building that is almost like a little karmic temple for him. It’s got this lovely, calm philosophy to it. And it occurs to me now, it’s kind of how Zak and I behaved, although I wasn’t conscious of that at the time.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind"><span aria-label="page 270" id="page_270" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Sleep also recommends <i>The Book of Joy</i> (Avery, 2016), which grew out of a week-long conversation between Archbishop Desmond Tutu and the Dalai Lama. It’s suffused with their life-affirming wisdom, mischievous humor, and joyous resilience. Speaking of his exile from Tibet, the Dalai Lama says, “So, personally, I prefer the last five decades of refugee life. It’s more useful, more opportunity to learn, to experience life. Therefore, if you look from one angle, you feel, oh how bad, how sad. But if you look from another angle at that same tragedy, that same event, you see that it gives me new opportunities. So, it’s wonderful. That’s the main reason that I’m not sad and morose. There’s a Tibetan saying: ‘Wherever you have friends, that’s your country, and wherever you receive love, that’s your home.’ ”</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Sleep and Zakaria placed their Bloomberg terminal on a low table without a chair, so that it was physically uncomfortable to expose themselves to a ceaseless influx of short-term news and moment-to-moment data. The best writer I’ve encountered on this subject of how to focus and actually <i>think</i> in an era of constant digital distraction is Cal Newport, a computer science professor at Georgetown University. He’s the author of <i>Deep Work</i> (Grand Central Publishing, 2016) and <i>Digital Minimalism</i> (Portfolio/Penguin, 2019). Explaining his “Deep Work Hypothesis,” Newport writes, “The ability to perform deep work is becoming increasingly <i>rare</i> at exactly the same time it is becoming increasingly <i>valuable</i> in our economy. As a consequence, the few who cultivate this skill, and then make it the core of their working life, will thrive.” That describes all of the most successful investors—from Buffett and Munger to Sleep and Zakaria.</li>
<li class="ennote">One of the secrets of financial success is the capacity to resist the lure of instant gratification—for example, by setting aside money for the distant future and holding investments for the long term instead of trading them frenetically. The same principle also applies to corporations. As Charlie Munger remarked at Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meeting in 2001, “Almost all good businesses engage in ‘pain today, gain tomorrow’ activities.”
<p class="ennoteind">The importance of delaying gratification also crops up in many of the morality tales that we read as children. After I discussed this subject with Thomas Russo, he wrote to me, “Less jam today for more jam tomorrow, the three little piggies, etc, are childhood tales that inculcate thoughtful people with the message of deferred gratification. Society has, however, created endless reasons why decision makers mistakenly prefer more jam today even at the expense of jam tomorrow. Much investment opportunity arises from being able to take the other side of the short termism bet. I have been blessed with investors who permit me to take the longer view.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">The ability—or inability—to delay gratification is also a popular topic in psychology. Most famously, the Marshmallow Test was a 1960s experiment in which hundreds of kids were presented with a treat and an excruciating choice: Either they could eat it immediately or wait several minutes until a researcher returned, at which point they could eat <i>two</i> treats. A team of psychologists from Stanford watched through a one-way observation window as these preschoolers wrestled with temptation. Walter Mischel, who designed the experiment, explores its implications in <i>The Marshmallow Test</i> (Little, Brown and Company, 2014). He found that “those who had delayed longer in preschool” were more <span aria-label="page 271" id="page_271" role="doc-pagebreak"/>able as adults “to pursue and reach long-term goals,” “reached higher educational levels, and had a significantly lower body mass index.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Maria Konnikova, who studied under Mischel at Columbia, wrote about him in a 2014 article for the <i>New Yorker</i> (“The Struggles of a Psychologist Studying Self-Control”). “Mischel has consistently found that the crucial factor in delaying gratification is the ability to change your perception of the object or action you want to resist,” she writes. “The key, it turns out, is learning to mentally ‘cool’ what Mischel calls the ‘hot’ aspects of your environment: the things that pull you away from your goal.” One of his cooling techniques involves mentally moving the object of desire to a safe distance in your imagination. Another way to control your impulses is to reframe the object—for example, by “picturing the marshmallows as clouds not candy.”</p></li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER SEVEN: HIGH-PERFORMANCE HABITS</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">What else should you read if you’re looking to form more positive habits? The most useful book I’ve studied on this subject is <i>The Power of Habit</i> (Random House, 2012) by Charles Duhigg. Drawing on research into the neuroscience and psychology of habit formation, Duhigg writes, “This is how new habits are created: by putting together a cue, a routine, and a reward, and then cultivating a craving that drives the loop.” For example, “If you want to start running each morning, it’s essential that you choose a simple cue (like always lacing up your sneakers before breakfast or leaving your running clothes next to your bed) and a clear reward (such as a midday treat, a sense of accomplishment from recording your miles, or the endorphin rush you get from a jog).… Only when your brain starts <i>expecting</i> the reward—craving the endorphins or sense of accomplishment—will it become automatic to lace up your jogging shoes each morning. The cue, in addition to triggering a routine, must also trigger a craving for the reward to come.”
<p class="ennoteind">Mohnish Pabrai and Guy Spier are enthusiastic cyclists, and they often use Facebook to share videos, photographs, and statistics from their long outdoor rides. I’ve often wondered why they bother. But I realize now that it’s a way of creating a psychological reward for themselves, which reinforces their desire to keep working on their fitness. Similarly, when COVID-19 led me to spend most of my time at home, I became unexpectedly obsessed with my Peloton bike and took part in a competition involving dozens of teams around the world. One of the highlights of each day came when my teammates and I shared charts detailing our heroic accomplishments.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Tom Gayner writes about the same four investment principles every year in Markel’s annual report. Repetitive? Absolutely. But that’s the point. His edge as an investor stems largely from his consistent application over three decades of the same sensible, disciplined, time-tested process. You can find an archive of his annual reports at <a href="http://www.markel.com">www.markel.com</a>. They’re worth reading each year because they’re characterized by Gayner’s steady commitment to qualities such as humility, integrity, long-term thinking, continuous improvement, and service. I suspect that we benefit by osmosis from keeping the company of someone who operates this way.</li>
<li class="ennote"><span aria-label="page 272" id="page_272" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Gayner’s standard approach to everything from investing to exercise to nutrition is to be “radically moderate,” instead of adopting a more extreme strategy that would be less sustainable. His mindset is reminiscent of Aristotle’s ancient teaching that enduring happiness comes from maintaining a harmonious balance known as the “golden mean.”
<p class="ennoteind">Lou Marinoff’s book <i>The Middle Way</i> (Sterling Publishing Co., 2007) explains that Aristotle’s study of Euclidean geometry, combined with his appreciation for the beauty of nature, persuaded the Greek philosopher that “human behaviors ought also to be based on ‘correct’ proportions.” According to Aristotle, “Both excessive and defective exercise destroys the strength, and similarly drink or food which is above or below a certain amount destroys the health, while that which is proportionate both produces and increases and preserves it. So too is it, then, in the case of temperance and courage and the other virtues.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">Marinoff contends that Aristotle, Buddha, and Confucius all “recognized that extremism is anathema to happiness, health, and harmony: yours and everyone else’s.” Applying the wisdom of these sages to our own era, Marinoff writes, “Materialists who pursue pleasure and profit above all else remain unhappy. Religious fanatics who pursue denial of modernism above all else remain unhappy.… Buddha’s Middle Way helps us avoid these extremes, by the practice of moderation in our own lives, and of compassion for the sufferings of others.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">There’s a great deal of practical wisdom in Gayner’s philosophy of radical moderation. But by most people’s standards, he’s still pretty extreme. After hearing about it from Gayner, I watched <i>The Last Dance</i>, a mesmerizing documentary series about Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls. It wasn’t hard to see why Gayner was inspired by Jordan, whose relentless work ethic and overpowering will to win made him an unstoppable force. Investing, like basketball, is so competitive at the highest levels that talent alone simply isn’t enough. As Peter Lynch told Bill Miller, “The only way you can beat them is to outwork them.”</p></li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">CHAPTER EIGHT: DON’T BE A FOOL</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">During my interview with Charlie Munger, I asked him to recommend a couple of books that I could give my children that would teach them how to avoid the “standard stupidities” that ruin many people’s lives. “Well,” he replied. “You’ve got <i>Poor Charlie’s Almanack</i>.” There’s no question that this compendium of Munger’s “wit and wisdom” is a priceless resource for anyone who’s serious about reducing their vulnerability to “unoriginal error.” It includes the dazzling 1986 commencement speech in which he shared his “prescriptions for guaranteed misery in life.”
<p class="ennoteind">Munger also mentioned to me the influence of the late Garrett Hardin, who helped him to develop the mental habit of “inversion.” Like Munger, Hardin solved problems backward by focusing first on what could go wrong, then trying to avoid that disastrous outcome. Hardin, who was a human ecologist, wrote numerous books, including <i>Filters Against Folly</i> (Viking, 1985). In weighing the risks of various calamities, such as a failure of the power grid, Hardin writes that <span aria-label="page 273" id="page_273" role="doc-pagebreak"/>“the only thing we can really count on in this uncertain world is human unreliability itself.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">For another take on the theme of our tragicomic fallibility, see <i>The Folly of Fools</i> (Basic Books, 2011) by Robert Trivers, a leading theorist in the field of evolutionary biology. It’s a disconcerting exploration of our capacity for self-deception. Trivers argues that we store false information in our minds so we can use it to manipulate others. As he puts it, “we lie to ourselves the better to lie to others.” Like Munger and Hardin, Trivers pushes us to acknowledge how prone we are to error and how wary we ought to be of our own minds. If you’re still inclined to trust your judgment, you might also want to read <i>The Logic of Failure</i> (Metropolitan Books, 1996) by Dietrich Dörner, a psychologist who writes about the predictable and avoidable ways in which we mess up when faced with complex decisions. The cover of my copy features an old photograph of two elegantly dressed gentlemen inspecting a train that has tumbled off the tracks.</p></li>
<li class="ennote">If you want to learn more about Munger’s way of thinking, the logical starting point is Tren Griffin’s <i>Charlie Munger</i> (Columbia University Press, 2015). It’s a concise book filled with clear-headed insights about how to behave rationally in markets and life. Serious Munger aficionados should also do battle with Peter Bevelin’s idiosyncratic books, starting with <i>Seeking Wisdom</i> (PCA Publications, 2007), which is dense and difficult but worth the effort, followed by <i>All I Want to Know is Where I’m Going to Die So I’ll Never Go There</i> (PCA Publications, 2016).</li>
<li class="ennote">Joel Tillinghast, who has generated superb returns over three decades as the manager of Fidelity’s Low-Priced Stock Fund, is also the author of <i>Big Money Thinks Small</i> (Columbia University Press, 2017). It’s a helpful guide for the regular investor, with plenty of common-sense advice on how to succeed by “avoiding mistakes.” Tillinghast closes his book with a simple insight that might just as easily have come from Munger, Pabrai, Greenblatt, or Marks: “Above all, always look for investments that are worth a great deal more than you are paying for them.” Their investment styles may differ, but they are all united by this underlying principle.</li>
<li class="ennote">Munger has deeply immersed himself in Benjamin Franklin’s writings, including his <i>Autobiography</i>. As a self-proclaimed “biography nut,” he’s also well-versed in books about Franklin by authors such as Carl Van Doren and Walter Isaacson. When I asked Munger what he’d learned from Franklin about how to reduce folly, he replied, “Ben Franklin I learned a lot from: the self-control; not showing off how smart you are; not being so argumentative. Now, he learned it better than I [did]. I still offend people in a way that Ben Franklin got over.”
<p class="ennoteind">When I read Franklin’s book <i>Poor Richard’s Almanack</i>, I could see throughout it aspects of Munger’s philosophy of business and life. For example, Franklin writes, “Tricks and Treachery are the Practice of Fools, that have not Wit enough to be honest.” And “A rich rogue, is like a fat hog, who never does good til as dead as a log.” And “He that lies down with Dogs, shall rise up with fleas.” And “An empty Bag cannot stand upright.” And “Glass, China, and Reputation are easily crack’d, and never well mended.” And “If you would be loved, love and be loveable.” And “If your Riches are yours, why don’t you take them with you to the t’other World?” And “The noblest question in the world is <i>What Good may I do in it?</i>”</p>
<p class="ennoteind"><span aria-label="page 274" id="page_274" role="doc-pagebreak"/>In his home, Munger has a bust of Franklin, along with one of Lee Kuan Yew, who “may have been the best nation builder that ever lived.” But in learning from the “eminent dead,” Munger isn’t only interested in their virtues and achievements. He’s also fascinated by their flaws and mistakes, which can be even more instructive. For example, says Munger, Franklin “failed in his relationship with his only surviving son,” who remained “loyal to the crown. That rupture never healed. It was just too much.… He didn’t even talk to his son at the end. That’s interesting. Franklin was capable of having more resentment than I have. I’ve conquered resentment better than Franklin did. I’m not that mad about the people I disapprove of.”</p></li>
</ol>
<h2 class="h2bm">EPILOGUE: BEYOND RICH</h2>
<ol class="nonlist1">
<li class="ennote">Bill Miller’s habit of drawing on philosophy to help him in every area of life makes him a particularly fertile source of book recommendations. He introduced me to the Stoics and left me with an enduring admiration for <i>Thoughts of a Philosophical Fighter Pilot</i>, (Hoover Institution Press, 1995) a splendidly titled book by a splendidly named man of action, Vice Admiral James Bond Stockdale. Thanks to Miller, I also discovered the bracing wisdom of <i>Meditations</i> by Marcus Aurelius, <i>The Discourses</i> by Epictetus, and <i>Letters from a Stoic</i> by Seneca. Likewise, I enjoyed another of Miller’s favorite books, Bryan Magee’s <i>Confessions of a Philosopher</i> (Random House, 1998), which is an autobiographical journey through Western philosophy.
<p class="ennoteind">Two decades ago, Miller also introduced me to the philosopher William James, whose works are collected in editions such as <i>Pragmatism and Other Writings</i> (Penguin Books, 2000). James, who pioneered the teaching of psychology at Harvard, was a groundbreaking observer of the ways in which we misperceive reality—a critical challenge facing every investor.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">In the 1890s, James delivered a talk titled “On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings.” He recalled visiting North Carolina, where he was shocked by the “unmitigated squalor” of a cabin in the mountains: “The forest had been destroyed; and what had ‘improved’ it out of existence was hideous, a sort of ulcer, without a single element of artificial grace to make up for the loss of Nature’s beauty.” Later, a mountaineer helped James to understand how differently the locals perceived this ravaged landscape. For them, “the cabin was a warrant of safety for self and wife and babes” and the clearing was “a symbol redolent with moral memories and sang a very paean of duty, struggle and success. I had been as blind to the peculiar ideality of their conditions as they certainly would also have been to the ideality of mine, had they had a peep at my strange indoor academic ways of life at Cambridge.”</p>
<p class="ennoteind">To Miller, the moral was clear. We must constantly guard against our prejudices—and seek to profit from opportunities that arise when others fall into this mental trap. When he spoke to me in 2001 about why he’d bought 15 percent of Amazon, he explained how James helped him to see beyond the biases that blinded his peers to the potential of this profitless bookseller.</p>
<p class="ennoteind">To learn more about James, read Louis Menand’s <i>The Metaphysical Club</i> <span aria-label="page 275" id="page_275" role="doc-pagebreak"/>(Farrar Strauss and Giroux, 2001) which explores the beliefs of four great thinkers: James, Charles Sanders Peirce, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., and John Dewey. Menand writes, “They all believed that ideas are not ‘out there,’ waiting to be discovered, but are tools—like forks and knives and microchips—that people devise to cope with the world in which they find themselves.”</p></li>
<li class="ennote">Since we first met in 2015, Arnold Van Den Berg and I have gifted each other many books. Concerned about my sloth, he also sent me a trampoline. I have a stack of his favorite titles beside me now in my study, including <i>The Wisdom of Your Subconscious Mind</i> (Prentice-Hall, 1964) by John Williams, <i>The Biology of Belief</i> (Mountain of Love Productions, 2008) by Bruce Lipton, <i>Core Healing</i> (Heart of the Golden Triangle Publishers, 2007) by Joyce Fern Glasser, <i>Right is Might</i> (Humanetics Fellowship, 1991) by Richard Wetherill, and a complete collection of James Allen’s writings titled <i>Mind Is the Master</i> (Penguin Group, 2010).
<p class="ennoteind">A common theme that runs insistently through many of the books that have shaped Van Den Berg is the belief that our consciousness determines our reality. He has spent half a century experimenting with different techniques to change his thoughts, influence his subconscious mind, and transform himself from within. Everything comes back to what he learned from his favorite book of all, <i>From Poverty to Power</i>. As Allen wrote 120 years ago, “It matters little what is without, for it is all a reflection of your own state of consciousness. It matters everything what you are within, for everything without will be mirrored and colored accordingly.”</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
</body>
</html>