<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-us" xml:lang="en-us">
<head>
<title>Footnotes</title>
<link href="../styles/9781501164873.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/SS_global.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:21d7bd89-41e5-48ab-bd9f-cfb984c8e375" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="h2n1">Introduction</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="intro.xhtml#footnote-065-backlink" id="footnote-065">I</a>. One of Runyon’s greatest short stories is “The Idyll of Miss Sarah Brown,” which inspired the musical <i>Guys and Dolls</i>. The hero, a high-rolling gambler nicknamed the Sky, receives invaluable advice from his father about the perils of overconfidence—a warning that every investor would do well to internalize. “ ‘Son,’ the old guy says, ‘no matter how far you travel, or how smart you get, always remember this: Some day, somewhere,’ he says, ‘a guy is going to come to you and show you a nice brand-new deck of cards on which the seal is never broken, and this guy is going to offer to bet you that the jack of spades will jump out of this deck and squirt cider in your ear. But, son,’ the old guy says, ‘do not bet him, for as sure as you do you are going to get an ear full of cider.’ ”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="intro.xhtml#footnote-064-backlink" id="footnote-064">II</a>. How did Thorp estimate the odds that COVID-19 would kill him? “A random eighty-seven-year-old male has about a twenty percent chance of dying if he gets the virus,” he told me. “My risk is lower because a lot of eighty-seven-year-old males have significant other health problems, and I don’t. I have no comorbidity. I’m also supercareful. And I’m quite fit for my age. So, I figured my chance of being killed by it is between two and four percent. But that’s still plenty high.”</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter One: The Man Who Cloned Warren Buffett</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-063-backlink" id="footnote-063">I</a>. What’s the answer to Pabrai’s question? This is a mystery that will forever elude me.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-062-backlink" id="footnote-062">II</a>. This assumes you invested in his original partnership (Pabrai Investment Fund 1) at its inception in 1999, and held it till March 31, 2018. Pabrai gave his initial investors a guarantee that he’d make them whole if they lost money. Realizing that this was onerously generous, he closed the fund and merged it with Pabrai Investment Fund 2 in 2002. It’s worth noting that his returns have been wildly volatile. For example, he suffered a 15.1 percent loss in the first half of 2020, leaving his fund up 671.3 percent since inception, versus 218.4 percent for the S&amp;P 500. One of his advantages is that these gut-wrenching swings don’t bother him.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-061-backlink" id="footnote-061">III</a>. Published in 1949, <i>The Intelligent Investor</i> has been hailed by Buffett as “by far the best book on investing ever written.” We’ll meet its remarkable author at greater length in chapter 4.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-060-backlink" id="footnote-060">IV</a>. Pabrai also liked that Buffett, whose investment record in real estate is “almost perfect,” owned Seritage in his personal stock portfolio. “Not only are we cloning his approach,” Pabrai tells me, “we’re directly cloning his position at one-fifth or one-sixth of the price he paid.” Disclosure: Cloning the cloner, I also invested in Seritage during the depths of the COVID crisis.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-059-backlink" id="footnote-059">V</a>. Most hedge funds charge a 2 percent management fee, plus 20 percent of the profits—a structure that Pabrai describes as “heads I win, tails you lose.” If these funds make a 10 percent return, their shareholders’ take (after fees) is only 6.4 percent. These high frictional costs doom hedge fund investors as a class to lag the market over the long run. By contrast, if Pabrai makes a 10 percent return, his shareholders receive 9 percent. After the 2008–9 financial crisis, he earned no fees for several years. At the time, he told me, “I’ve been living on fresh air, water, and peanuts. I’m ready for mutton and curry.” The feast arrived in 2017 when his flagship fund returned 92.2 percent and he earned more than $40 million in performance fees.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-058-backlink" id="footnote-058">VI</a>. Where does Pabrai get his investment ideas? He borrows them by analyzing the portfolios of leading investors such as Buffett, Ted Weschler, Seth Klarman, and David Einhorn. Pabrai glances at their top three or four holdings (which are listed each quarter in an investment manager’s 13F filings) and tries to figure out why these are their favorite ideas. He couldn’t understand why Weschler and Einhorn liked General Motors, which seemed an obvious dud. After six weeks of intense research, he’d figured it out. That led to an enormously lucrative bet on auto stocks, most notably in Fiat Chrysler.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-057-backlink" id="footnote-057">VII</a>. In the interests of disclosure, I should mention that Spier is one of my closest friends. I’ve been an investor in his hedge fund, Aquamarine, for twenty years. I’ve edited his fund’s annual report on several occasions. I’m an adviser to the board of his investment firm. I also helped him to write his memoir, <i>The Education of a Value Investor</i>. In other words, I’m an unusually close observer of Spier’s but not an impartial one.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-056-backlink" id="footnote-056">VIII</a>. Since then, Pabrai has divorced.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-055-backlink" id="footnote-055">IX</a>. Guerin gave his shareholders quite a ride, losing 42 percent in 1973 and 34.4 percent in 1974. Even so, his compounded rate of return over nineteen years was 23.6 percent after fees.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-054-backlink" id="footnote-054">X</a>. Pabrai makes an exception to this policy when investing in a less developed market such as India, where he tries to judge in person whether he can trust the management.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-053-backlink" id="footnote-053">XI</a>. As you may have guessed, Swami Vivekananda wasn’t discussing the path to investment glory. Rather, he was teaching would-be Yogis how to become “spiritual giants.” His advice was to renounce once and for all the habit of “nibbling at things” and focus instead on a single objective: “To succeed, you must have tremendous perseverance, tremendous will. ‘I will drink the ocean,’ says the persevering soul, ‘at my will, mountains will crumble up.’ Have that sort of energy, that sort of will, work hard, and you will reach the goal.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-052-backlink" id="footnote-052">XII</a>. By the end of 2018, Pabrai’s family had given more than $27 million to Dakshana. The biggest outside donors are Prem Watsa (the CEO of Fairfax Financial Holdings and a graduate of IIT) and Radhakishan Damani (who is said to be India’s second-richest person). Disclosure: I’ve given a few thousand dollars to Dakshana.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-051-backlink" id="footnote-051">XIII</a>. The Colonel, who is one of the most admirable people I’ve ever encountered, has a deep sense of mission that’s connected to the loss of his daughter. He once told me that God had taken one child from him and given him a thousand.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-050-backlink" id="footnote-050">XIV</a>. After reading a draft of this book, Guy Spier wrote me an email to emphasize that there’s nothing “nonchalant” about Pabrai’s approach to cloning: “I worry that ‘shameless cloner’ does not quite capture the remarkable intensity and ferocity with which Mohnish has cloned the right things.… Indeed, it seems to me that underlying all of the personalities in your book, there is a deep intensity and ferocity of purpose that is obscured by their calm exteriors.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch01.xhtml#footnote-049-backlink" id="footnote-049">XV</a>. While reading Sacks’s autobiography <i>On the Move</i>, I discovered that his writing was also the product of cloning. Sacks, a neurologist who wrote spellbinding case histories about his patients’ disorders, recalled reading <i>The Mind of a Mnemonist</i>, a 1968 book by a Soviet neuropsychologist named A.R. Luria. That book, which recounts the history of a patient of Luria’s who had a limitless memory, “altered the focus and direction of my life,” wrote Sacks, “by serving as an exemplar not only for <i>Awakenings</i> but for everything else I was to write.” When I read Luria’s book, I was thrilled to discover that he, too, was a cloner. In writing his medical case histories, Luria said, “I tried to follow in the steps of Walter Pater in <i>Imaginary Portraits</i>, written in 1887.” Once I started searching, I found a whole host of cloners in various fields, including business. For example, in explaining Walmart’s success, Munger observed, “Sam Walton invented practically nothing. But he copied everything anybody else ever did that was smart—and he did it with more fanaticism.… So he just blew right by them all.”</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Two: The Willingness to Be Lonely</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch02.xhtml#footnote-048-backlink" id="footnote-048">I</a>. It’s worth acknowledging that there are intense controversies over diagnostic labels such as Asperger’s syndrome, a form of high-functioning autism named for a Nazi pediatrician who advocated child euthanasia. My goal here isn’t to make amateur diagnoses of great investors but to suggest that many seem to be wired in ways that give them a temperamental edge.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch02.xhtml#footnote-047-backlink" id="footnote-047">II</a>. This was the equivalent of roughly $183,000 today.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch02.xhtml#footnote-046-backlink" id="footnote-046">III</a>. The actual details of the deal are somewhat murky. Our knowledge of it is based on a 1626 letter from a Dutch merchant who, in those politically incorrect times, wrote, “They have purchased the Island of Manhattes from the savages for the value of 60 guilders.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch02.xhtml#footnote-045-backlink" id="footnote-045">IV</a>. In <i>The Templeton Touch</i>, Lauren Templeton says her great-uncle was “so disciplined that a single unproductive thought was unwelcome in his mind. He once told me that when he detected an unproductive thought, he would seize it ‘and banish it to the nothing from which it came.’ ”</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Three: Everything Changes</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-044-backlink" id="footnote-044">I</a>. Shunryu Suzuki Roshi, a famous Zen teacher, used the Japanese phrase shogyō-mujō, which he translated as “everything is changing.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-043-backlink" id="footnote-043">II</a>. Price, who was dubbed “the father of growth investing,” founded his eponymous company in 1937. Today, it’s a global behemoth with more than $1 trillion in assets.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-042-backlink" id="footnote-042">III</a>. Similarly, Warren Buffett has often said that he won the “ovarian lottery” when he was born in the United States in 1930. Over lunch with Mohnish Pabrai and Guy Spier, he mentioned traveling with Bill Gates to China and watching a young Chinese man dragging boats to the shore. Buffett was struck by the realization that many opportunities were closed to this man solely because of accidents of birth that were beyond his control. Buffett added that his own investment career would never have been possible if he’d been born in China because he couldn’t have read Benjamin Graham’s books, which hadn’t been translated into Chinese.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-041-backlink" id="footnote-041">IV</a>. More recent studies have highlighted the same risk. A report by Calamos Investments showed that the S&amp;P 500 returned 7.2 percent annually from 1998 through 2017. If you missed the twenty best days in the market over those twenty years, your annual return sagged to just 1.1 percent.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-040-backlink" id="footnote-040">V</a>. Polaroid sported a price/earnings ratio of 94.8 when the Nifty Fifty mania peaked in 1972. By the time the market bottomed in 1974, Polaroid’s stock had fallen 91 percent. Avon fell 86 percent, while Xerox dropped 71 percent.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-039-backlink" id="footnote-039">VI</a>. In speaking about fragility, Marks is borrowing terminology used by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in <i>Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder</i>. But another of Taleb’s books had a more profound influence on him: <i>Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets</i>.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch03.xhtml#footnote-038-backlink" id="footnote-038">VII</a>. Shinzen Young describes equanimity as a “detached, gentle matter-of-factness within which pleasure and pain are allowed to expand and contract without self-interference.” It’s not dissimilar to the way Marks views the markets, recognizing and accepting that “it is what it is” and, in that nonreactive state, having the clarity to respond logically and without emotion.</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Four: The Resilient Investor</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-037-backlink" id="footnote-037">I</a>. Graham’s relationship with Columbia made it the intellectual hub of value investing—a status that it retains to this day. He won a scholarship to Columbia and proved so polymathically brilliant that, before graduating in 1914, he was invited to teach in three different departments: English, mathematics, and philosophy. He became an investor instead. But he returned to Columbia as an evening lecturer in 1928 and taught there for the next twenty-eight years, grooming a generation of investors that included Warren Buffett, Irving Kahn, and Bill Ruane.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-036-backlink" id="footnote-036">II</a>. Graham, who was originally named Benjamin Grossbaum, came from a family of Orthodox Jewish immigrants from Poland. As someone who shares that background, I think it’s not unreasonable to draw a connection between his family history (which was fraught with the persecution and danger faced by Eastern European Jews) and his investment philosophy (which centered on mitigating risk and seeking safety).</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-035-backlink" id="footnote-035">III</a>. When I ask Eveillard if he remains a practicing Catholic, he replies, “I do believe. But the Church annoys me.” He’s a nontribal outsider not only as an investor but even in his religious life.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-034-backlink" id="footnote-034">IV</a>. Biologically, Kahn was a magnificent specimen. He seldom exercised, had an insatiable appetite for red meat, and smoked until he was about 50—yet still made it to the age of 109. It makes you wonder how long he would have lived if he’d taken better care of himself. His son Thomas says Irving’s inquisitive mind helped to keep him young. But he also had spectacular genes: he was one of four siblings who lived beyond 100.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-033-backlink" id="footnote-033">V</a>. In <i>Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk</i>, Peter Bernstein writes that total returns averaged only 7 percent a year from 1926 to 1945. Meanwhile, the standard deviation of annual returns (a measure of their variation from the mean) was 37 percent a year. It was an awful combination: lackluster returns and sickening volatility.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-032-backlink" id="footnote-032">VI</a>. Indeed, the decades <i>after</i> 1945 proved to be a glorious era for investors. Those who learned from 1926 to 1945 that stocks were too treacherous to touch would have missed out as the Dow Jones Industrial Average rocketed from about 150 in 1945 to almost 1,000 in 1966. Bernstein notes that the standard deviation of total returns from 1945 to 1966 fell to <i>one-third</i> of what it had been from 1926 to 1945. It was an awesome combination: lavish returns and gentle volatility. The lesson for investors is extraordinarily important. If you ever expect the world to remain stable or financial markets to continue along one consistent path (either good or bad), just remind yourself of the differences between those three periods: 1908–11, 1912–45, and 1945–66. Change is the norm. Complacency is the enemy.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-031-backlink" id="footnote-031">VII</a>. It’s also worth acknowledging that a fund manager with $100 billion in assets <i>can’t</i> run a concentrated portfolio. Mohnish Pabrai, who has most of his money in a handful of stocks, views diversification as a recipe for mediocre returns. But there’s a tension between outperformance and survival. Pabrai is more likely than McLennan to produce dazzling returns, but he’s also more likely to fly his fund into the side of a mountain. McLennan adds that, since 1926, “the vast majority of the market’s performance came from about four percent of the stocks.… If you try to be too concentrated, your chances of being in that right four percent are probabilistically quite low.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch04.xhtml#footnote-030-backlink" id="footnote-030">VIII</a>. That figure, which excludes a sales charge for buying the First Eagle Global Fund, covers the period from January 1979 through May 2020. The fund’s cumulative return over those four decades (or so) was 12,845 percent, versus 3,945 percent for the MSCI World Index. The lesson? Steady Compounding – Disaster = Spectacular Success.</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Five: Simplicity Is the Ultimate Sophistication</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-029-backlink" id="footnote-029">I</a>. Part of the pleasure of Greenblatt’s wisecracks is that they are entirely gratuitous. For example, he includes the following definition in the glossary section of <i>You Can Be a Stock Market Genius</i>: “VILLAGE IDIOT: Someone who spends $24 on an investment book and thinks he can beat the market. (Just kidding.)”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-028-backlink" id="footnote-028">II</a>. Another of my favorite examples of simplicity in science comes from Dr. Dean Ornish, the father of lifestyle medicine, who synthesized in eight syllables everything that he’s learned from his four decades of trailblazing research on health and nutrition: “Eat well, move more, stress less, love more.” Ornish recently told me, “When you really understand something deeply, spend your whole life doing something, then you can make it simple.… You can reduce it down to its essence. And that <i>is</i> the essence.” I’d strongly recommend his remarkable book <i>Undo It! How Simple Lifestyle Changes Can Reverse Most Chronic Diseases</i>, which might just save your life.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-027-backlink" id="footnote-027">III</a>. This phrase is often attributed to Leonardo da Vinci, but it’s not clear that he actually said it.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-026-backlink" id="footnote-026">IV</a>. In his 2016 letter to Berkshire Hathaway’s shareholders, Buffett wrote, “If a statue is ever erected to honor the person who has done the most for American investors, the hands-down choice should be Jack Bogle.… In his early years, Jack was frequently mocked by the investment-management industry. Today, however, he has the satisfaction of knowing that he helped millions of investors realize far better returns on their savings than they otherwise would have earned. He is a hero to them and to me.” Bogle died in 2019.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-025-backlink" id="footnote-025">V</a>. When Bogle launched the first index fund in 1976, it attracted a grand total of $11.4 million. His ambition of merely matching the market’s return was dismissed as an exercise in mediocrity. But Bogle understood a profound truth: over time, the lavish fees and expenses levied by active managers can have a devastating impact on investors’ net returns. To market the novel concept of indexing, Bogle presented a table showing that $1 million invested at 10 percent a year would grow to $17.5 million in thirty years. By contrast, an active investor who blew 1.5 percent a year in expenses (thereby reducing that 10 percent return to 8.5 percent) would turn $1 million into $11.5 million in thirty years. In other words, by saving 1.5 percent a year in expenses, the cost-conscious investor ended up with an extra $6 million. As Bogle told me, “I just knew that the math of investing was eternal.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-024-backlink" id="footnote-024">VI</a>. Inconveniently, I suspect that Holmes never uttered these exact words. But he came close in a 1902 letter that he wrote to Lady Georgina Pollock: “The only simplicity for which I would give a straw is that which is on the other side of the complex—not that which never has divined it. With which remark I shut up.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-023-backlink" id="footnote-023">VII</a>. If you want to improve your ability to read balance sheets and income statements, Greenblatt recommends books such as Benjamin Graham’s <i>Interpretation of Financial Statements</i>, James Bandler’s <i>How to Use Financial Statements</i>, and John Tracy’s <i>How to Read a Financial Report</i>.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-022-backlink" id="footnote-022">VIII</a>. In the “Owner’s Manual” for Berkshire Hathaway’s shareholders, Buffett explains, “Intrinsic value is an all-important concept that offers the only logical approach to evaluating the relative attractiveness of investments and businesses. Intrinsic value can be defined simply: It is the discounted value of the cash that can be taken out of a business during its remaining life.… Over time, stock prices gravitate toward intrinsic value.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-021-backlink" id="footnote-021">IX</a>. Unbeknownst to Greenblatt, Milken was flying too close to the sun. In 1990, Milken pled guilty to six counts of securities and tax violations, and he ultimately paid more than $1 billion in legal settlements and fines. He spent twenty-two months in the jailhouse, but avoided the poorhouse: according to <i>Forbes</i>, he’s now worth about $3.7 billion. In 2020, Milken controversially received a presidential pardon.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-020-backlink" id="footnote-020">X</a>. Buffett continued to buy Coca-Cola shares until 1994, ultimately investing about $1.3 billion in what he described as “the best large business in the world.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-019-backlink" id="footnote-019">XI</a>. In his research study, Greenblatt measured earnings yield by calculating the ratio of pretax operating earnings (EBIT) to enterprise value (market value of equity + net interest-bearing debt). In other words, EBIT/Enterprise Value. He measured return on capital by calculating the ratio of pretax operating earnings (EBIT) to tangible capital employed (net working capital + net fixed assets). In other words, EBIT/(Net Working Capital + Net Fixed Assets). For the sake of simplicity, his calculations used earnings-related figures from the latest twelve-month period.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch05.xhtml#footnote-018-backlink" id="footnote-018">XII</a>. The data-crunching was far more arduous than it sounds. For example, Greenblatt’s team measured the performance of the “magic formula” portfolios over 193 one-year rolling periods between 1988 and 2004—from January 1988 to January 1989, from February 1988 to February 1989, and so on. The tests produced many striking results, including the revelation that the magic formula portfolios beat the market in 169 out of 169 three-year rolling periods.</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Six: Nick &amp; Zak’s Excellent Adventure</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch06.xhtml#footnote-017-backlink" id="footnote-017">I</a>. These figures exclude Nomad’s performance fees. The fund’s annualized return <i>before</i> fees was 20.8 percent. After fees, it was 18.4 percent, versus 6.5 percent for the MSCI World Index.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch06.xhtml#footnote-016-backlink" id="footnote-016">II</a>. The research department at Merrill Lynch was particularly cynical, positioning itself as a relentless cheerleading team that helped to attract lucrative investment banking clients to the firm. Henry Blodget, Merrill’s star internet analyst, issued buy recommendations for companies that he described privately as “dogs,” a “piece of shit,” and “falling apart.” In 2003, regulators fined Blodget $4 million and banned him permanently from the securities industry. I’m not writing this to single him out, but to give you a flavor of that euphoric period and a keen sense of why we need to be perennially wary of <i>anything</i> that Wall Street is powerfully incentivized to sell.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch06.xhtml#footnote-015-backlink" id="footnote-015">III</a>. In the unlikely event that you’re wondering about the origin or meaning of this elegant phrase, it’s a reference to the 1977 punk album <i>Never Mind the Bollocks, Here’s the Sex Pistols</i>. The word <i>bollocks</i>—a British term for testicles—was deemed so offensive that many stores refused to carry the album. But the <i>Oxford English Dictionary</i> says the word has been in use since at least the thirteenth century. The Sex Pistols emerged triumphant from their obscenity trial after an expert witness noted that <i>bollocks</i> even made an appearance in early translations of the Bible. The controversy helped to launch the career of Richard Branson, who’d released the album on Virgin Records.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch06.xhtml#footnote-014-backlink" id="footnote-014">IV</a>. Sleep, who believes in what he describes as “nondenominational kindness,” says, “I don’t know whether there’s a God or not, but if you change the word from <i>God</i> to <i>good</i>, I completely believe in that.… It’s enough for me that good exists, and I believe that good things grow.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch06.xhtml#footnote-013-backlink" id="footnote-013">V</a>. Since I first wrote this sentence, I’ve come to realize that it’s not entirely true. In reality, I often check my portfolio several times a day during stressful periods such as the COVID-19 pandemic. It’s a nervous habit that’s more harmful than helpful. On the plus side, it hasn’t yet driven me to make any impetuous investment moves. Still, it’s unsettling to realize how easy it is for me to backslide and become addicted to such counterproductive habits.</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Seven: High-Performance Habits</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch07.xhtml#footnote-012-backlink" id="footnote-012">I</a>. I’m not suggesting that Gayner’s way of eating and exercising would work equally well for everyone, given the complex interplay of factors such as genetics and metabolism. But I’m confident that his approach would work better for most of us than Buffett’s health regimen, which includes breakfast at McDonald’s on his way to the office, heartbreaking quantities of red meat, and rivers of Coca-Cola. Buffett once joked to Mohnish Pabrai’s daughters that he wouldn’t touch anything that he didn’t eat when he was less than five years old.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch07.xhtml#footnote-011-backlink" id="footnote-011">II</a>. NEWS FLASH! When we spoke again in 2020, Gayner informed me, “This morning, as I stepped on my scale, I was 189.6.” His steady, persistent effort had paid off and he had finally returned to what he weighed thirty years ago.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch07.xhtml#footnote-010-backlink" id="footnote-010">III</a>. Gayner’s father, who was his biggest influence, was the embodiment of good-humored resilience. He grew up in the Great Depression, which bankrupted the family’s glassmaking business, plunging them into poverty. In his youth, he earned cash by sneaking out of the house at night and playing clarinet in an illegal speakeasy. He fought in World War II and was shot in the knee. He later qualified as an accountant, bought a liquor store, and put together small property deals. “My father was the richest person I’ve ever known,” says Gayner. “And it’s not because he had more money than Jeff Bezos or Warren Buffett. But he had <i>enough</i>. That’s a psychological statement.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch07.xhtml#footnote-009-backlink" id="footnote-009">IV</a>. Lou Marinoff’s illuminating book <i>The Middle Way: Finding Happiness in a World of Extremes</i> explores some fascinating parallels between Aristotle, the Buddha, and Confucius. Buddha, like Aristotle, exhorted his students to pursue the “Middle Way,” avoiding two opposing and “unprofitable” extremes: “the addiction to indulgence of sense pleasures” and “the addiction to self-mortification.” As for Confucius, he taught that “the superior man” follows “the path of the Mean,” which leads to mental equilibrium and a harmonious social order.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch07.xhtml#footnote-008-backlink" id="footnote-008">V</a>. My favorite story about Danoff’s intensity comes from Bill Miller, who recalls being introduced to him at an investment conference in Phoenix about thirty years ago: “I stuck out my hand and I said, ‘Nice to meet you, Will.’ And he didn’t hold his hand out. He just looked at me and said, ‘I’m gonna beat you, man. I’m gonna beat you.’ ”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch07.xhtml#footnote-007-backlink" id="footnote-007">VI</a>. Lountzis, who worked for Bill Ruane as a young analyst, inherited his willingness to concentrate aggressively in a few high-quality businesses trading at attractive valuations. In 2020, Lountzis told me that he’d exploited the crash triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic to boost his stake in Berkshire Hathaway to 25 percent of his stock portfolio.</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Chapter Eight: Don’t Be a Fool</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch08.xhtml#footnote-006-backlink" id="footnote-006">I</a>. While it’s true that Martin adheres strictly to his investment process, he adds an important caveat: “A process is not a fixed thing. It’s dynamic.” Every year, his team spends three days discussing how to improve their process.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch08.xhtml#footnote-005-backlink" id="footnote-005">II</a>. Another way that Martin increases his odds of survival is by keeping costs exceptionally low at his investment firm, not least by paying himself a modest base salary of $150,000 a year. He also lives on a tiny fraction of his total income. “If I’m wrong today, I’ll be right tomorrow,” he says,“because I’ll be <i>around</i> for tomorrow.”</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch08.xhtml#footnote-004-backlink" id="footnote-004">III</a>. The Daily Journal, which sells legal newspapers and software for court systems, has performed decently for a publishing company. But with a market value of less than $400 million, it’s a side interest for Munger, not the main event. It’s his stake in Berkshire that’s made him a billionaire. Still, he’s nowhere near as rich as Buffett, partly because he began his investment career after a stint in law, whereas Buffett began to compound money in the womb.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="ch08.xhtml#footnote-003-backlink" id="footnote-003">IV</a>. The <i>Annual Review of Psychology</i> reaches the same conclusion that “time delay” can be a helpful strategy, since “full-blown emotions are short-lived” and “humans revert back to baseline states over time.”</p>
<h2 class="h2n">Epilogue: Beyond Rich</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="epilogue.xhtml#footnote-002-backlink" id="footnote-002">I</a>. Thorp has since moved about four miles along the coast to Laguna Beach, where he’s even closer to the ocean.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="epilogue.xhtml#footnote-001-backlink" id="footnote-001">II</a>. Miller’s second-largest position is an enormous bet on Bitcoin. In short, this is not a portfolio for the faint of heart.</p>
<p class="footnote"><a href="epilogue.xhtml#footnote-000-backlink" id="footnote-000">III</a>. Van Den Berg’s brother, Sigmund, also survived.</p>
</body>
</html>